>> CHOCOLATE SAUCE OR CARAMEL
SAUCE?
WHICHEVER YOU WANT.
>> Reporter: OF ALL THE THINGS
SISTERS CAITLIN LYON AND
MICHELLE NOVOSEL HAD TO CONSIDER
BEFORE THEY OPENED THEIR
CHOCOLATE STORE IN HUNTSVILLE,
ALABAMA, HEALTHCARE CARRIED
PARTICULAR WEIGHT.
CAITLIN WOULD BE GIVING UP A
FULL-TIME GOVERNMENT CONTRACTING
JOB WITH GOOD BENEFITS.
>> THAT WAS ONE OF THE HUGE
CONSIDERATIONS IN LEAVING THAT
JOB, WAS NOT ONLY, YOU KNOW,
WAS I GOING TO MAKE LESS MONEY,
BUT SUDDENLY THE WHOLE LANDSCAPE
FOR INSURANCE WAS CHANGING.
I HAVE TO HAVE INSURANCE.
I HAVE SEVERAL CHRONIC ILLNESSES
THAT I HAVE TO HAVE LAB WORK
EVERY COUPLE OF MONTHS.
AND I SEE, LIKE, THREE DIFFERENT
SPECIALISTS EVERY THREE TO SIX
MONTHS.
>> Reporter: AS THEIR STORE,
PIZZELLE'S CONFECTIONS, OPENED
IN 2013, OBAMACARE BECAME AN
OPTION.
THEY SHOPPED FOR A PLAN ON THE
FEDERAL INSURANCE MARKETPLACE
ESTABLISHED AS PART OF THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT.
THE SISTERS WERE AMONG THE
98,000 PEOPLE IN ALABAMA WHO
SIGNED UP.
CAITLIN OPTED TO ENROLL WITH
BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD, MICHELLE
WITH HUMANA.
>> IT WAS, YOU KNOW, A LITTLE
BIT OF A HEADACHE TO BEGIN WITH,
BUT I GOT A GOOD SUBSIDY.
IT TURNED OUT TO BE REALLY GOOD
AT THE BEGINNING.
>> Reporter: LIKE 81% OF
OBAMACARE ENROLLEES NATIONWIDE,
THE COST OF THEIR PLANS WAS
OFFSET BY FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
SUBSIDES DETERMINED BY THEIR
INCOME.
AS RECENTLY AS LAST YEAR,
ALABAMA RESIDENTS ENROLLED IN
OBAMACARE HAD THREE PROVIDERS TO
CHOOSE FROM: HUMANA, UNITED
HEALTHCARE AND BLUE CROSS BLUE
SHIELD.
BUT THIS YEAR, ONLY BLUE CROSS
REMAINED, AND IT ALREADY
CONTROLLED MORE THAN 90% OF
ALABAMA'S PRIVATE INSURANCE
MARKET.
BOTH UNITED HEALTHCARE AND
HUMANA CITED THE HIGH COSTS OF
INDIVIDUALS ENROLLED IN THE
MARKETPLACE AS THE REASON FOR
THEIR DEPARTURE.
>> THAT'S WHEN EVERYONE SAW THAT
HUGE JUMP IN PREMIUMS, AND
THAT'S WHEN EVERYONE KIND OF GOT
SCARED AS TO, ARE WE GOING TO
HAVE HEALTH INSURANCE?
ARE WE NOT?
>> Reporter: BLUE CROSS
DECLINED OUR REQUEST FOR
AN INTERVIEW BUT IN A PREVIOUS
STATEMENT SAID RISING PREMIUMS
ARE IN RESPONSE TO THE GREATER
USE OF MEDICAL SERVICES AND
DIMINISHED HEALTH OF
OBAMACARE ENROLLEES.
THIS YEAR, PREMIUMS INCREASED BY
AN AVERAGE OF 39%.
FOR MICHELLE, WHO HAD BEEN WITH
HUMANA, HAVING TO SWITCH TO A
BLUE CROSS PLAN MEANT HER
MONTHLY PREMIUM ROSE SLIGHTLY
FROM $157 TO $167 A MONTH.
CAITLIN, WHO WAS ALREADY ON BLUE
CROSS, WAS FACING A MUCH STEEPER
INCREASE.
SHE SAYS THE PLAN THAT COVERED
HER AND HER HUSBAND WENT FROM
ABOUT $800 TO $1,200 A MONTH.
>> IT WAS MORE THAN OUR MORTGAGE
PAYMENT, AND THERE WAS NO WAY TO
FIT THAT INTO OUR BUDGET.
I DON'T KNOW A LOT OF PEOPLE WHO
HAVE AN EXTRA $1,200 A MONTH TO
SPEND ON JUST THE PREMIUM.
THAT DOESN'T EVEN COUNT ANY OF
THE CO-PAYS AND THE REST OF IT
THAT YOU'RE GOING TO PAY WHEN
YOU SEE THE DOCTOR.
>> Reporter: ALABAMA IS ONE OF
FIVE STATES NOW WITH A SINGLE
INSURANCE PROVIDER THROUGH
OBAMACARE.
AND LIKE ALABAMA, BLUE CROSS
BLUE SHIELD IS EACH STATE'S ONLY
PROVIDER.
SINCE THE BEGINNING OF THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT, SUBSIDIES
FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAVE
PLAYED A ROLE IN THE COST OF
INSURANCE PLANS.
DETERMINED BY INDIVIDUAL OR
HOUSEHOLD INCOME, IT HELPS
OFFSET MONTHLY PREMIUMS.
SO, AS CAITLIN AND MICHELLE'S
INCOME ROSE, THE LEVEL OF THEIR
SUBSIDY DECLINED.
ALABAMA HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION
PRESIDENT DON WILLIAMSON LED THE
STATE'S DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC
HEALTH AS THE AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT TOOK EFFECT.
WHAT DOES HEALTHCARE LOOK LIKE
IN ALABAMA WITHIN THE PUBLIC
EXCHANGE MARKET?
>> BLUE CROSS HAS BEEN OUR
DOMINANT INSURANER FOR AN
AWFULLY LONG TIME.
WHERE IT REALLY COMES INTO PLAY
IS WHEN YOU LOOK AT WHAT THE
PREMIUMS AND WHAT THE SUBSIDIES
ARE.
FOR ALABAMA, WE NOW HAVE 178,000
PEOPLE ON OUR EXCHANGE.
OF THOSE 178,000,
90-PLUS-PERCENT OF THEM GET A
SUBSIDY IN THE MARKETPLACE, AND
THAT'S EXTRAORDINARILY
IMPORTANT.
>> Reporter: WILLIAMSON SAYS THE
OBAMACARE SUBSIDIES HAVE KEPT
PACE WITH THE RISE IN PREMIUMS.
THE AVERAGE OUT OF POCKET COST
PER ENROLLEE IN ALABAMA IS NOW
$111 A MONTH.
>> FOR THE 90% THAT ARE GETTING
A SUBSIDY, THE FACT THAT OUR
PREMIUM COST IS HIGHER IS REALLY
NOT A PARTICULAR ISSUE.
WHERE IT BECOMES AN ISSUE IS FOR
THAT 10% THAT DON'T GET A
SUBSIDY.
>> Reporter: LEAVING PEOPLE LIKE
CAITLIN LYON FEELING THE
SQUEEZE.
THE SUBSIDY IS THE ONLY WAY
PEACH FARMER HANK ADCOCK CAN
AFFORD OBAMACARE.
WE VISITED ADCOCK ONE EVENING ON
HIS BIRMINGHAM-AREA FARM,
STARTED BY HIS GRANDFATHER.
THE 62-YEAR-OLD HAD NEVER HAD
HEALTH INSURANCE BEFORE
OBAMACARE.
>> WE COULDN'T AFFORD IT.
FOR ME AND MY WIFE, IT WAS LIKE
$1,600 A MONTH.
>> Reporter: BUT WITH THE
GOVERNMENT SUBSIDY, INSURANCE
FOR HIM AND HIS WIFE COSTS THEM
UNDER $200 A MONTH.
>> IT'S THIS WONDERFUL THING
THAT, TO KNOW THAT IF SOMETHING
MAJOR HAPPENS TO ME, I CAN GO TO
THE HOSPITAL, THEY CAN WORK ON
ME AND, YOU KNOW, TRY TO FIX ME.
>> Reporter: SOMETHING MAJOR DID
HAPPEN TO ADCOCK A FEW MONTHS
AFTER ENROLLING.
HIS HAND GOT STUCK IN A HAY
BALER, CUTTING OFF TWO OF HIS
FINGERS.
THE MEDEVAC HELICOPTER AND
HOSPITAL BILL WAS $111,000, BUT
HIS INSURANCE PLAN COVERED IT.
>> I WAS INSURED.
IF I HADN'T, I MEAN, I'D HAVE
LOST THE FARM.
I COULDN'T HAVE PAID THE BILLS,
YOU KNOW.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT THEY WOULD'VE
DONE.
I CAN'T COMPLAIN ABOUT BLUE
CROSS BLUE SHIELD.
YOU CAN'T BEAT IT.
>> Reporter: ADCOCK ALSO
REPRESENTS ANOTHER COMPLICATED
PIECE OF ALABAMA'S INSURANCE
PUZZLE-- THE STATE'S DECISION TO
NOT EXPAND MEDICAID DURING THE
ADOPTION OF THE AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT.
ALABAMA IS ONE OF 19 STATES THAT
REJECTED THE MEDICAID EXPANSION.
HOW MUCH DO THINK ALABAMA'S
DECISION TO NOT EXPAND MEDICAID
HAS INFLUENCED THE CURRENT
PLAYING FIELD?
>> WHAT YOU'VE DONE IS, YOU'VE
NOW PUT PEOPLE ON THE EXCHANGE
IN ALABAMA WHO, IN A STATE THAT
EXPANDED MEDICAID, WOULD NOT BE
ON THE EXCHANGE.
AND TO THE EXTENT THAT, BECAUSE
THEY HAVE A LOWER INCOME, AND
THEY MAY HAVE HIGHER UNDERLYING
CONDITIONS, YOU'VE CREATED A
LESS HEALTHY POOL OVER WHICH YOU
HAVE TO SPREAD RISK, WHICH MAY
CONTRIBUTE TO SOME OF THE HIGHER
PREMIUMS.
>> Reporter: AND THOSE THAT HAVE
NEITHER OBAMACARE NOR MEDICAID
DIRECTLY AFFECT ALABAMA'S
HOSPITALS.
DAVID SPILLERS IS C.E.O. OF THE
HUNTSVILLE HOSPITAL HEALTH
SYSTEM, WHICH RUNS SEVERAL
DIFFERENT HOSPITALS ACROSS
NORTHERN ALABAMA.
FROM THE HOSPITAL'S PERSPECTIVE,
WERE YOU DISTRESSED WHEN ALABAMA
DECIDED NOT TO EXPAND MEDICAID?
>> CLEARLY, I WAS DISAPPOINTED.
THE BLOCK OF PEOPLE WHO WOULD
HAVE QUALIFIED FOR SOME TYPE OF
INSURANCE UNDER THE EXPANSION IS
A LARGE NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN THE
STATE OF ALABAMA.
THOSE PEOPLE HAVING INSURANCE
WOULD SIGNIFICANTLY HELP
PROVIDERS LIKE US WHO ARE
PROVIDING HEALTHCARE BUT NOT
GETTING PAID FOR IT.
>> Reporter: HOW MUCH OF A HIT
WAS THAT FOR THE HOSPITAL?
>> WELL, IT, THE HIT WAS-- LAST
YEAR, OUR COST OF FREE CARE WAS
ABOUT $65 MILLION.
NOW, NOT ALL OF THAT WOULD'VE
BEEN COVERED HAD WE EXPANDED
MEDICAID, BUT A PORTION OF THAT
WOULD'VE BEEN COVERED.
I MEAN, EVERY, EVERY BIT HELPS.
>> Reporter: THERE'S LONG BEEN A
DISCUSSION THAT IF THE NUMBER OF
INSURERS WERE TO INCREASE, COSTS
COULD COME DOWN.
DO YOU THINK THAT'S A FAIR
ASSESSMENT?
>> I DON'T THINK THAT HAVING TWO
OR THREE MORE INSURANCE
COMPANIES IN THE STATE OF
ALABAMA IS IMMEDIATELY GOING TO
CHANGE THE LANDSCAPE.
AND THE REASON IS, BLUE CROSS OF
ALABAMA IS SO LARGE, AND THEY
NEGOTIATE RATES SO LOW WITH US,
IT'S HARD FOR US TO GO GIVE
THOSE RATES TO SOMEBODY ELSE.
>> Reporter: SONJA SMITH HELPS
RESIDENTS SIGN UP FOR OBAMACARE
AS A PROJECT COORDINATOR FOR
"ENROLL ALABAMA."
SHE AGREES WITH SPILLERS THAT
HAVING A SINGLE INSURER ON THE
PUBLIC EXCHANGE HAS NOT
DRASTICALLY CHANGED THE
INSURANCE MARKETPLACE.
>> I NEVER HEARD ANYONE SAY,
"OH, I WISH I HAD MORE OPTIONS."
HAVING A LIMITED NUMBER OF
PLANS, WE ACTUALLY FOUND IT
EASIER, BECAUSE WE WERE BETTER
ABLE TO DO A SIDE-BY-SIDE
COMPARISON FOR PEOPLE, FOR THEM
TO REALLY SEE, "OKAY, WELL, THIS
IS WHAT WORKS FOR ME AND THIS IS
WHAT DOESN'T."
>> Reporter: DO YOU THINK THAT
IF THERE WERE MORE OPTIONS, IF
THERE WERE MORE PLANS, BECAUSE
THERE WERE MORE INSURERS, THAT
THE PRICES WOULD, WOULD COME
DOWN?
>> I CAN'T NECESSARILY SAY THAT
IT WOULD MAKE THAT MUCH OF A
DIFFERENCE.
>> Reporter: IN THE END, CAITLIN
AND MICHELLE FOUND WORKAROUNDS.
MICHELLE, A NEWLYWED AS OF THIS
PAST MONTH, IS NOW ON HER
HUSBAND'S PLAN, OFFERED THROUGH
HIS EMPLOYER; WHILE CAITLIN
PURCHASED A GROUP PLAN WITH TWO
EMPLOYEES, BRINGING HER AND HER
HUSBAND'S MONTHLY PREMIUM DOWN
TO $645 A MONTH.
I FEEL LIKE YOUR STORY
ENCAPSULATES HEALTHCARE IN
AMERICA.
YOU'VE GOT A GROWING SMALL
BUSINESS, AND THIS HEADWIND THAT
AFFORDABLE CARE AND INSURANCE
HAS PUT ON YOU IS TREMENDOUS.
>> HEALTHCARE SEEMS OVERLY
COMPLICATED IN THE UNITED STATES
RIGHT NOW.
IT'S NOT OKAY THAT PEOPLE SHOULD
HAVE TO MAKE DECISIONS ABOUT
JOBS, OR THEIR BUSINESS, OR
THESE BIG DECISIONS, BASED ON
WHETHER OR NOT THEY'RE GOING TO
BE ABLE TO AFFORD TO GO TO THE
DOCTOR.
MANY OF OUR EMPLOYEES, MOST OF
THEM GET SUBSIDIES THROUGH THE
MARKETPLACE, BECAUSE IT'S A
BETTER DEAL EVEN THAN GETTING A
GROUP RATE THROUGH OUR BUSINESS.
AND THESE ARE REAL PEOPLE WITH
REAL PROBLEMS, WHO HAVE TO THINK
ABOUT INSURANCE, LIKE, EVERY
DAY.